python3: documentation of the new plugin interface (#599)
bareos/bareos: docs/manuals/source/TasksAndConcepts/Plugins.rst

.. index:: Plugin

The functionality of Bareos can be extended by plugins. Plugins exist

> for the different daemons (Director, Storage- and File-Daemon).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for the different daemons (Director-, Storage- and File-Daemon).
```

To use plugins, they must be enabled in the configuration (:strong:`Plugin Directory`\  and optionally :strong:`Plugin Names`\ ).

If a :strong:`Plugin Directory`\  is specified, :strong:`Plugin Names`\  defines which plugins get loaded.

If :strong:`Plugin Names`\  is not defined, all plugins found in the :strong:`Plugin Directory` are loaded.

The program :ref:`bpluginfo` can be used to retrieve information about a specific plugin.

Python Plugins

> ==============

Author: ```suggestion
--------------
```

A special case of the Bareos Plugins are the Python Plugins.
The Python plugins create a connection between the Bareos Plugin API and the
Python programming language. With the Python plugins, it is possible to implement
Bareos Plugins by writing Python code.

> For each daemon there exists a Daemon Python Plugin which is a plugin implementing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To connect the C API of Bareos to the python code for each daemon there exists a Python Plugin that can load other python modules. 
```

> the C API for Bareos plugins.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

This Python plugin can be configured via the usual plugin configuration mechanism
which python files to load. The python files then implement the plugin
functionality.

Examples for such Python Plugins are the VMware Python Plugin or the oVirt Python Plugin.

Modernization of the Python plugin API

> --------------------------------------

Author: ```suggestion
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
```

For Bareos :sinceVersion:`20: Python API`, the Bareos Python API was refactored and
adapted to support both Python version *2* and Python version *3*.

Description of the Bareos Python plugin API for Bareos < 20

> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Author: ```suggestion
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
```

In  Bareos < 20, the Bareos Python plugin API consists of a Bareos daemon
plugin (**python-fd**, **python-sd**, **python-dir**). These plugins are
shared objects that are loaded by the corresponding daemon during startup.

.. uml::
  :caption: Bareos Python Plugin Architecture for Bareos < 20

  package "Bareos Daemon" {
  [Core]
  }

  package "Daemon Python Plugin (shared library)" {
  [Python Extension Module]
  [Python Interpreter]
  }

  package "Python Plugin Scripts" {
  [Python Plugin Files]
  [Python Constants File]
  }

  [Core] <-> [Python Interpreter] : Bareos Plugin API

  [Python Interpreter] <-> [Python Extension Module] : use
  [Python Extension Module] <-> [Python Plugin Files] : Python Plugin API
  [Python Plugin Files] -> [Python Constants File] : imports

> This plugin then creates an **internal Python extensoin module** and starts a **Python 2**

Author: ```suggestion
This plugin then creates an **internal Python extension module** and starts a **Python 2**
```

interpreter being able to access the Python module.

The **internal Python extension module** allows the Python plugin to call functions

> implemented in Python, and implements callback functions that can be called

Reviewer: ```suggestion
implemented in Python from the core, and implements callback functions that can be called
```

from the Python code into the core. It also implements the data types that are
exchanged via the Bareos plugin interface.

Finally, the Python interpreter loads the Python script configured in the
**Plugin string** of the file set and executes it. This Python script is the
Bareos plugin implemented in Python.

As the **internal Python extension module** is only created inside of the Python
plugin, debugging and testing is a challenge.

Definitions of constants required for the Python plugins callbacks into the

> Bareos core are stored in a Python file called

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Bareos core are located in a Python file called
```

*bareos_[fd|sd|dir]_consts*, for example *bareos_fd_consts.py*.

> This file contained the required definitions in form of dictionaries, like the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This file contains the required definitions in form of dictionaries, like the
```

following example:

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: bareos_fd_consts: definition as dictionary

    bRCs = dict(
        bRC_OK=0,
        bRC_Stop=1,
        bRC_Error=2,
        bRC_More=3,
        bRC_Term=4,
        bRC_Seen=5,
        bRC_Core=6,
        bRC_Skip=7,
        bRC_Cancel=8,
    )

To access these values, every Python plugin needs to import this file and
access the values via the dictionary like in the following example:

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: bareos_fd_consts: accessing

   import bareos_fd_consts
   ... # more code
   return bareos_fd_consts.bRCs["bRC_OK"]

The API also always carries a **context** variable which is part of
every function call between the Bareos core and Python, so that every function

> being called from the core has an context which needs to be given back to every

Reviewer: ```suggestion
called from the core has a context which needs to be returned to every
```

call that goes into the core.

Description of the new Bareos Python plugin API for Bareos >= 20

> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Author: ```suggestion
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
```

> Since Bareos :sinceVersion:`20: Python3`, two Python plugins exist for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since Bareos :sinceVersion:`20: Python3`, two Python plugin versions exist for
```

> Since Bareos :sinceVersion:`20: Python3`, two Python plugins exist for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since Bareos :sinceVersion:`20: Python3`, two Python plugins (one for each version) exist for
```

each Bareos daemon, where the **python-** prefix means that the plugin supports
Python 2, and the **python3-** prefix supports Python 3.

> The following six plugins now exist:

Reviewer: Die zwei Plugins von oben sind wiedersprüchlich zu den "six plugins" von hier.

   ===============  =========== ============
    Python Version  Python 2    Python 3
   ===============  =========== ============
    filedaemon      python-fd   python3-fd
    storage daemon  python-sd   python3-sd
    director        python-dir  python3-dir
   ===============  =========== ============

The functionality of the former *internal Python extension module* is now implemented
as real Python extension module with the name *bareos[fd|sd|dir]*, for example
**bareosfd**.
Every Python plugin now has a corresponding Python extension module.

.. uml::
  :caption: Bareos Python Plugin Architecture for Bareos >= 20

  package "Bareos Daemon" {
  [Core]
  }

  package "Daemon Python Plugin (shared library)" {
  [Python Interpreter]
  }

  package "Python Extension Module (shared object)" {
  [Python Extension Module]
  }

  package "Python Plugin Scripts" {
  [Python Plugin Files]
  }

  [Core] <-> [Python Interpreter] : Bareos Plugin API

  [Python Interpreter] <-> [Python Extension Module] :  load and use
  [Python Extension Module] <-> [Python Plugin Files] : Python Plugin API

The Python plugin creates a Python interpreter with either Python 2 or Python 3

> which then loads the corresponding Python extension module. Afterwards the interpreter

Reviewer: ```suggestion
which in turn loads the corresponding Python extension module. Afterwards the interpreter
```

loads the Python script configured in the *Plugin* fileset setting and executes
it.

As the Python extension module for the Python Plugin is now available outside of the
Daemon Python Plugin. It is now a real stand-alone Python extension module implemented in
C which can be loaded and tested independently.

> Definitions required for the Python plugin callbacks into the Bareos core

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Constants required for the Python plugin callbacks into the Bareos core
```

   'bEventRestoreCommand', 'bEventRestoreObject', 'bEventSince',
   'bEventStartBackupJob', 'bEventStartRestoreJob', 'bEventStartVerifyJob',
   'bEventType', 'bEventVssBackupAddComponents', 'bEventVssBackupComplete',
   'bEventVssCloseRestore', 'bEventVssCreateSnapshots',
   'bEventVssInitializeForBackup', 'bEventVssInitializeForRestore',
   'bEventVssPrepareForBackup', 'bEventVssPrepareSnapshot',
   'bEventVssRestoreLoadComponentMetadata',
   'bEventVssRestoreSetComponentsSelected', 'bEventVssSetBackupState',
   'bFileType', 'bIOPS', 'bJobMessageType', 'bLevels', 'bRC_Cancel',
   'bRC_Core', 'bRC_Error', 'bRC_More', 'bRC_OK', 'bRC_Seen', 'bRC_Skip',
   'bRC_Stop', 'bRC_Term', 'bRCs', 'bVarAccurate', 'bVarClient',
   'bVarDistName', 'bVarExePath', 'bVarFDName', 'bVarFileSeen', 'bVarJobId',
   'bVarJobName', 'bVarJobStatus', 'bVarLevel', 'bVarPrefixLinks',
   'bVarPrevJobName', 'bVarRegexWhere', 'bVarSinceTime', 'bVarType',
   'bVarVersion', 'bVarVssClient', 'bVarWhere', 'bVarWorkingDir', 'bVariable']

During the restructuring of the plugin API it became clear that the *context*
that was always transferred between the core and the Python Plugin and back was

> **unnecessary**, so it was completely removed from the API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**unnecessary**, so it is completely removed from the API.
```

The members of the **bareosfd.stat_pkt** type have been renamed with the
**st_** prefix to match with the member names of Pythons' **os.stat_result**.

> Porting existing Python plugins:

Author: ```suggestion
Porting existing Python plugins
```

> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reviewer: ```suggestion
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
```

> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Author: ```suggestion
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
```

Porting existing Python plugin from Version 19 to 20 requires is not very hard
and requires the following steps:

   Remove "context" everywhere

>       The context being transferred between all Python API calls was unnecessary

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      The context being transferred between all Python API calls is unnecessary
```

      and was removed, so it needs to be removed in all Python callers and callbacks.

>    Switch to the constants being defined in the bareos[fd|sd|dir] Python plugin.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Switch to the constants defined in the bareos[fd|sd|dir] Python plugin.
```

      Import bareos[fd|sd|dir] instead of bareos_[fd|sd|dir]_consts.

   Add the **st_** prefix to all members of **stat_pkt** type.

   Adapt the code to run on Python 2 **and** Python 3
      It is important to make sure the code works both for Python 2 and 3.

>       While the c++ code and the Python api have been reorganized, the Python

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      While the C++ code and the Python API have been reorganized, the Python
```

      plugin code itself is the same being run with Python 2 or 3.  Existing

>       plugins have been ported and the current Python 2 version support

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      plugins have been ported and the current Python 2 version supports
```

      already a lot of things required by Python 3.
      For more details see `Python 3 Porting Guide, strings chapter: <https://portingguide.readthedocs.io/en/latest/strings.html>`_

> Switching to Python 3:

Author: ```suggestion
Switching to Python 3
```

> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Author: ```suggestion
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
```

Switching to use the Python 3 plugin, the following needs to be changed:
  * Set `Plugin Names = "python3"` to make sure the Python3 plugin is loaded.
  * Adapt the Plugin setting in the fileset to use Python3: `Plugin = "python3:module_path ...`

> Recovering old backups:

Author: ```suggestion
Recovering old backups
```

> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Author: ```suggestion
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
```
